[Music]
yoke is essentially a spiritual
discipline based on extremely subtle
science
it is an art and science for healthy
living
the word yoke is derived from the
Sanskrit word uke meaning to joy or
unite
[Music]
according to yogic scriptures the
practice of yoga leads to the union of
the individual consciousness with that
of the universal consciousness
indicating a perfect balance between
mind and body man and nature the
[Music]
science of yoga has its origins
thousands of years ago before the first
religions or belief systems were born in
yogic lore Shiva the first yogi or Adi
yogi transmitted his profound knowledge
to his seven disciples the famous
subterra she's or the seven sages yoke
was practiced through the pre vedic
period
[Music]
but it was Maharishi Basenji known as
the father of modern yoga who
systematized and codified the then
practices through his Yoga Sutras later
many yoke masters contributed to the
preservation and development of Europe
and the spreading of this wonderful
practice
there are different schools of yoga
these include
gallo poppy or
karma yo
Patanjali yoga
Hatillo
Kundalini Yoga tranio
mantra you layer you
Jen you bother you etc
each school has its own approach and
practices that lead to the ultimate aims
and objectives of you
some of the widely practiced yoga
sadhana's are yama niyama
asana pranayama
pratyahara
dharana dhyana
samadhi
and pedrad shut Karma's Gupta Hara
mantra japa
uke the Carlmont a
yoga practitioner should follow the
guiding principles while performing
yogic practices
before practice yogic practice should be
performed in a calm and quiet atmosphere
with a relaxed body and mind it should
be done on an empty stomach or light
stomach consume a small amount of honey
in lukewarm water if you feel weak
light and comfortable cotton clothes are
preferred to facilitate easy movement of
the body
in case of chronic diseases or pain or
cardiac problems a physician or a yoga
therapist should be consulted prior to
performing yogic practices
during practice practice sessions should
start with a prayer or invocation as it
creates a conducive environment to relax
the mud
yogic practices shall be performed
slowly in a relaxed manner with
awareness of the body and breath
do not hold the breath unless it
especially mentioned to do so
do not hold the body tact ly or jerk the
body
perform the practices according to your
own capacity end the session with deep
silence or shanthi part
food or a bath may be taken only 20 to
30 minutes after practice
welcome to the world of yoga
welcome to the world of wisdom that is
as relevant and beneficial today as it
was thousands of years ago
[Music]
and
some bad ones
[Music]
some whoa my Nancy
Jonathan
my
[Applause]
Baba
Booey
[Music]
[Applause]
Sanjana
[Music]
enjoy all of
our city
[Music]
welcome to the world of yoga
let us start new sadhna with Challinor
kriyas or loosening practices to
increase microcirculation
neck exercises forward and backward neck
bending
stand in an alert posture
keep feet comfortably apart and your
arms on the waist
exhale and bend head forward slowly and
try to touch the chin to the chest
inhale move the head as far back as is
comfortable and
come back with inhalation
[Music]
right and left neck bending exhale Bend
the head slowly to the right bring the
year as close as possible to the
shoulder
inhale bring the head to normal position
exhale Bend the head to the left side
inhale bring the head up to normal
position
right and left twisting
exhale gently turn the head to the right
side so that the chin is in line with
the shoulder inhale bring the head to
the normal position
exhale
turn the head to the left side
inhale and bring the head to the normal
position
neck rotation bend the head forward
trying to touch the chin to the chest
inhale slowly rotate the head clockwise
while coming down exhale
rotate the head in anti-clockwise
direction
feel the stretch around the neck and
loosening up of the joints and muscles
of the neck and release of tension in
the neck people with neck pain and
spondylitis should do the practice
gently
[Music]
shoulder movements
feet together make the body straight the
arms by the sides inhale raise both the
arms sideways above your head with the
palms outwards
exhale and bring them down in the same
manner the
arms must not touch the head when going
up or the thighs when coming down
the bombs must be open with the fingers
together
[Music]
shoulder rotation
stand erect raise both the arms
place the fingers of the left hand on
the left shoulder and the fingers of the
right hand on the right shoulder
full rotation of both the elbows in a
circular manner
try to touch the elbows in front of the
chest on the forward movement and touch
the years while moving up
stretch the arm back in the backward
movement and touch the sides of the
trunk while coming down
do the same anti-clockwise and
repeat five times
practice of this Kriya makes the bones
muscles and nerves of the shoulder
region healthy these practices are
helpful in cervical spondylitis and
frozen shoulder
trunk twisting keep the legs about two
feet apart raise both the arms up to
chest level with the palms facing each
other
exhale twist the body towards the right
side so that the left palm touches the
right shoulder
come back with inhalation
now exhale twist the body towards the
left side so that the right palm touches
the left shoulder
come back with inhalation
repeat do slowly with breathing
[Music]
avoid this practice in case of vertebral
and disk disorders and during
menstruation
relax in standing posture
Lee movements
inhale lift your arms up at the shoulder
level
exhale bend the knees and bring down
your body to the squatting position
inhale and straighten the body
repeat two more times
this practice strengthens the knees and
hip joints
avoid this in case suffering from acute
arthritis exhale while bringing down the
hands
now let us move to yogasana
[Music]
thoracic bar means palm tree
keep your feet two inches apart
interlock the fingers and
turn the wrist outwards
inhale raise the arms up and bring them
in line with the shoulders raise the
heels off the floor and balance on the
toes
stay in this position for 10 to 15
seconds this awesome brings stability in
the body helps to clear up congestion of
the spinal nerves corrects faulty
posture exhale bring the heels down
release the interlock of the fingers and
bring the arms down parallel to the
trunk and come back to a standing
posture
[Music]
bricks asana
rich means tree
[Music]
stand with the feet two inches apart
focus on a point in front exhale bend
the right leg and place the foot on the
inside of the left thigh the heel should
be touching the perineum inhale and
extend the arms up and
join the palms stay in this position for
10 to 15 seconds and breathe normally
this improves neuromuscular coordination
endurance and alertness
avoid this practice in case of arthritis
and obesity
exhale and
bring the arms and right foot down and
repeat the asan bend the left leg and
place the foot on the right thigh the
heel should touch the perineum
inhale
extend the arms up and join the palms
[Music]
relax
bad hasta sana
pada means foot hasta means hand
inhale slowly and raise the arms up
stretch up the body from the waist
exhale and bend forward
until the entire farm rests on the
ground
maintain this final posture for 10 to 30
seconds those who have a stiff back
should bend according to their capacity
now inhale come up slowly to the
vertical position and stretch the arms
above the head
exhale and slowly return to the starting
position in reverse order
relax
oh
the chakras on
support the back at the waist
exhale
drop the head backwards stretch the neck
muscles and bend backwards from the
lumbar region
relax with normal breathing stay there
for ten to thirty seconds
out of the chapter makes the spine
flexible and strengthens the spinal
nerves and
improves breathing capacity
inhale and slowly come up and relax
[Music]
hypertensive patients shall Bend with
care
three konasana
three cone means triangle
stand with your feet comfortably apart
slowly raise both the arms sideways till
they are horizontal
exhale
slowly bend to the right side and place
the right hand just behind the right
foot the left arm is straight up in line
with the right arm remain in this
posture for ten to thirty seconds with
normal breathing
this prevents flatfoot strengthens the
calf thigh and waist muscles makes the
spine flexible as you inhale slowly come
up
repeat for the left side
avoid this posture in case of slipped
disc sciatica and after undergoing
abdominal surgery do not go beyond your
limits
[Music]
Pedraza
let us now get ready for sitting
postures Pedraza Vadra means firm sit
erect with the legs stretched out
straight in front keep the hands beside
the hips this is dandasana
now put the soles of your feet together
exhale and clasp your hands together
over your toes
pull your heels as close as possible up
to the perineum region this is the final
position
stay here for some time
[Music]
Pedraza keeps the body firm and
stabilizes the mind
now stretch your leg and come to viscera
muscle
avoid this practice in case of severe
arthritis and try attica
[Music]
Vajrasana
sit in done the awesome
fold your legs and sit on your heels
[Music]
keep the thighs close and big toes
touching
place the hands on the knees
the head and back should be straight
this is Vajrasana
[Music]
artist Rahsaan
sit in Vajrasana
get up on your knees
place the hands on the waist with the
fingers pointing downwards keep the
elbows and shoulders parallel bend the
head back and
stretch the neck muscles and
bend the trunk backwards as much as
possible as
you exhale relax
remain in this posture for 10 to 30
seconds with normal breathing
it helps to strengthen the back and neck
muscles
relieves constipation and back pain
return with inhalation
sit in Vajrasana
relaxed
now we perform the full version of
oestrus onna
sit in Vajrasana
kneel down on the floor
keep your thighs and feet together
get up on your knees
bring the knees and the feet a few
inches apart while inhaling bend
backwards
place the right palm on the right heel
and the left palm on the left heel be
careful not to jerk the neck while
bending backwards
Ostra sauna is extremely useful for
defective eyesight this is useful in
relieving back pain and neck pain it
helps to reduce fat over the abdomen and
hips
though suffering from high blood
pressure heart disease and hernia should
not practice this
return with inhalation
sit in Vajrasana
relaxed
[Music]
Shashank Azam
Shashank means hair
spread both the knees wide apart
keep the toes touching keep the palms
between the knees
exhale and slowly stretch them full
length
bend forward and place the chin on the
ground keep the arms parallel
look in front and maintain the posture
this helps to reduce stress and anger
inhale and come up exhale and come back
to Vajrasana
stretch your legs back to Vishram
awesome
[Music]
patients with osteoarthritis should do
this with caution
[Music]
bouton man Duke asana
the final position of Bhutan man Duke
asana resembles an upright frog hence
the name sit in Vajrasana
spread both the knees wide apart while
the toes remain together
inhale raise both the arms
then cross both arms behind the head and
place the hands on the upper part of the
opposite shoulders
keep the back and neck straight
maintain this position for a while
this asana is helpful in backache and
cervical pain it helps in improving
diaphragmatic movement and helps to
improve lung capacity persons with
severe knee joint pain should not
perform it
while coming back
slowly raise both the arms with
inhalation
bring back
and bring the needs together as in the
initial position
[Music]
but classy
vaca means twisty
bend the right leg and place the right
foot beside the left knee bring the left
arm around the right knee and place the
palm beside the right foot exhale twist
the body and neck to the right
[Music]
comfortably remain in this posture
turn your head back
take out your hands with exhalation
stretch your legs
now come back and relax in best ramazan
this awesome increases flexibility of
the spine it helps to overcome
constipation dyspepsia and in the
management of diabetes
repeat the same on the other side
[Music]
turn your head back
take out your hands with exhalation
stretch your legs now
come back and relax in be Strom asana
[Music]
Makara sana
Makara means crocodile lie down on your
stomach with the feet wide apart feet
pointing outward
rest your head on your hands relax
this is Macar asana this asana is
practiced for relaxation in all prone
postures it promotes relaxation of the
lower back
[Music]
bhujangasana
now let us be ready for prohm postures
bhujangasana bojong means snake or cobra
lie down on your stomach rest your head
on your hands and relax the body
now join your legs and
stretch your arms
keep the forehead on the ground
keep your pants beside the chest and
raise the elbows inhale lift the chin
and chest up to the navel region
this is pooja Nasim
this Osen is best for stress management
it also helps to manage backache and
bronchial problems
exhale
rest your forehead on the ground and
stretch your arms
spread your legs
place your palms and rest your head on
the palms and relax
Shallah bossom
shall abba means a locust lie down on
your stomach now join your legs
press the chin on the floor
keep both hands beside the body palms
facing upwards inhale raise the legs off
the floor as much as you can without
bending the knees
extend the arms and legs well to ease
the lift of the body off the floor
stay in this position comfortably
this Asin helps ensure attica and lower
back ache it tones the hip muscles
now exhale bring the legs down towards
the floor
take out your arms and
rest on the floor
cardiac patients should avoid this
posture
say to bandhasana
now we move to supine postures say to
bandhasana say to band means formation
of a bridge
join your legs keep the arms beside the
body bend both the legs at the knees and
bring the heels near the buttocks hold
both the ankles firmly
inhale
slowly raise your buttocks and trunk up
as much as you can to form a bridge
remain comfortably
this is the final position
this asana relieves depression and
anxiety
it strengthens the lower back muscles
now exhale
slowly return to the original position
and
relax
lie down on your back
please note
women in advanced stages of pregnancy to
not practice this awesome
[Music]
Boutin pada sana raised feet posture
in this asana the legs are raised upward
in a supine position hence the name
like comfortably on the ground with the
legs stretched out the hands should be
placed by the sides
while inhaling slowly raise both the
legs without bending them at the knees
and bring them to a 30-degree angle
maintain this position with normal
breathing
exhale and slowly bring both the legs
down and place them on the ground
it balances the navel Center nabhi
Manipur chakra
earth halasana half plough posture
this posture is known as earth halasana
because in its final position the body
resembles half the shape of an Indian
plough
take a supine position keep the hands by
the sides of the thighs palms resting on
the ground
slowly raise your legs together without
bending at the knees
first raise the legs up to 30 degrees
then further up to a 60 degree angle
now slowly raise the legs to a 90-degree
angle
this is the final position of the ad
halasana
the body from the hip to the shoulder
should be kept straight
[Music]
then slowly bring the legs back to the
ground without lifting the head
this is very beneficial for hypertensive
patients but needs to be practiced with
care
those who have lumbosacral or lower back
pain should not perform this with both
legs together
[Music]
Pavan McDonough bend both the knees and
bring the thighs to the chest
interlock the fingers and clasp the shin
below the knee raise the head and
shoulders try to touch the knees with
the chin
this is pavan moccasin
[Music]
this removes constipation
gives relief from flatulence and
tones up the back muscles and spinal
nerves
[Music]
bring your head back
exhale
stretch your legs
and
relax
avoid this practice in case of abdominal
injuries hernia try Attica and during
pregnancy
shavasan
shove means the dead body
this awesome is meant for complete
relaxation
lie down on your back with the arms and
legs comfortably apart
bombs facing upward
eyes closed
relax the whole body consciously
[Music]
become aware of natural breath and
allow it to become rhythmic and slow
remain in this position till you feel
refreshed and relaxed
this Ahsan helps relieve all kinds of
tensions and gives rest to both the body
and the mind
it is very beneficial in the management
of stress and its consequences
[Music]
kapalabhati
it and stimulates respiratory centers in
the frontal brain
[Music]
sit in any meditative posture close the
eyes and relax the whole body
inhale deeply expand the chest expel the
breath with forceful contractions of the
abdominal muscles continue active
exhalation and passive inhalation
[Music]
then take a deep breath
exhales slowly
and relax this is one round of
kapalabhati
each round should be followed by deep
breathing
now do two more rounds
[Music]
Cabala palace purifies the frontal air
sinuses helps to overcome cough
disorders it is useful in treating codes
rhinitis sinusitis asthma and bronchial
infections
[Music]
please avoid this practice in case of
cardiac conditions high blood pressure
vertical migraine stroke hernia and
gastric ulcers
[Music]
pranayama
nadi shodhana or a new loom viloma
is alternate breathing through the left
and right nostrils
sit in a meditative posture
keep the spine straight and the head
erect with eyes closed
relax the body with a few deep breaths
keep the left palm on the left knee in
Gyan mudra
the right hand should be in Manasseh
Kagura mantra
place the right thumb on the right
nostril breathe in from the left nostril
close the left nostril
exhale through the right nostril
[Music]
next inhale through the right nostril
close the right nostril and
exhale through left nostril
[Music]
this is one round of nadi shodhana or an
alone viloma pranayama
repeat for another five rounds
[Music]
for beginners the duration of inhalation
and exhalation should be equal
gradually make it one is to two
inhalation exhalation the breath should
be slow steady and controlled the main
purpose of this pranayama is to purify
the principle channels of energy
this nourishes the whole body it induces
tranquility
helps to improve concentration it
increases vitality and lowers the level
of stress and anxiety
it also elevates cough disorders
[Music]
she thali pranayama sheathe means cool
it also means calm and passionless as
the name indicates this pranayama cools
the mind-body system
sit in the Padmasana or any other
comfortable sitting posture place the
hands on the knees in the GaN mudra or
Anjali mudra
roll the tongue in from the sides to
shape it as a tube
inhale through this tube shaped tongue
fill the lungs with air to their maximum
capacity and close the mouth and
then slowly exhale through the nostrils
sheetal ii pranayaam purifies the blood
it has a cooling effect on the body it
is beneficial for persons suffering from
high blood pressure it satisfies thirst
and appeases hunger
it relieves indigestion and disorders
caused by phlegm cough and bile it is
beneficial for the skin and the eyes
those who are suffering from cold cough
or tonsillitis should not do this
pranaya
[Music]
robbery pranayama
brother means a black pee during the
exhalation of this pranayama the South
produced resembles the buzzing of a
black bee
inhale deeply through both nostrils
exhale slowly in a controlled manner
making a deep steady humming sound as
the
[Music]
this is one round of primary repeats two
more times
[Music]
this is a great tranquilizer it's found
good in the management of stress-related
disorder
[Music]
now do the bloomery with some mochi
movie
close your ears with your thumbs place
the four fingers on your eyes
middle fingers of the nostrils ring
finger and small fingers on the lips
open your nose and inhale through both
nostrils
exhale slowly in a controlled manner
making the deep humming sound of a black
bee
[Music]
it is a useful preparatory pranayama for
concentration and meditation
can
now let us prepare for Dion
Vianne or meditation is an act of
continuous contemplation
[Music]
sit in any meditative posture
keep your spine comfortably erect
hold gana mudra keep your palms facing
upwards upon the thighs
arms and shoulders should be loose and
relaxed
close your eyes and sit with a slightly
upturned face
you need not concentrate just
maintain a mild focus between the
eyebrows and be conscious of your breath
Jian keeps the mind calm and quiet
it increases concentration memory
clarity of thought and willpower
it rejuvenates the whole body and mind
giving them proper rest
it helps to develop positive emotions
meditation leads to self-realization
continue to be in this state of yarn
[Music]
let us now to example
I commit to make myself into a healthy
peaceful joyful and loving human being
through every action of mine I will
strive to create a peaceful and loving
atmosphere around me I strive to break
the limitations of Who I am right now
and include the entire world as my own I
recognize the kinship of my own life
with every other line I
recognize the unity of all there is
in the yoga practice session with Shanti
Park or universal prayer
[Music]
the Sakina
needle
[Music]
survey by dari but shunned
oh
gosh dokubón me
[Music]
Mashti
the
sharpie
[Music]
you